# JavaOptimizer

This is a simple mathematical optimizer for linear and nonlinear programs.  

#Requirements
Java 1.8

#Overview

##Scalar
The Scalar interface abstracts the value of a scalar, and its partial derivatives with respect to any variables.  It has a single type parameter, VarKey, which is used to create variables and look up partial derivatives with respect to variables. Scalars can be constructed either with the Scalar.var or Scalar.constant method.  Scalar.constant creates a new scalar object of the specified value with no partial derivatives.  Scalar.var creates a scalar object associated with the given VarKey with a derivative of 1 with respect to that varkey and a value equal to the value of the specified varkey in the given context.  

`
Scalar<String> five = Scalar.constant(5);
System.out.println(five.value()); // prints 5

Scalar<String> x = Scalar.var("x", 2.0);
System.out.println(x.value()); // prints 2
Scalar<String> fiveX = x.times(five);
System.out.println(fiveX.d("x")); // prints 5
`


The Scalar interface supports several operations, which currently include arithmetic operations, power, exp, ln, sigmoid and tanh.  Most operators implement the .d(x) method by analyzing the derivatives of their parents.  This can become expensive when sequential operations reference prior steps multiple times.  In these cases, the .cache method should be used to aggregate a local map of VarKeys to derivatives.

##Matrix

The Matrix interface is used to represent all vectors and matrices.  Matrices have a static height and width that are passed in when they are constructed.  The .get method may be used to access each of a Matrix's scalar elements.  Matrices can be most easily instantiated by invoking the .var method on a map of IndexedKeys to doubles.  

`
Map<IndexedKey<String>, Double> context = new HashMap<>();
context.put(IndexedKey.matrixKey("m", 0, 0), 1.0);
context.put(IndexedKey.matrixKey("m", 0, 1), 2.0);
context.put(IndexedKey.matrixKey("m", 1, 0), 4.0);
context.put(IndexedKey.matrixKey("m", 1, 1), 5.0);
Matrix<String> matrix = Matrix.var("m", 2, 2, context);
`

The Matrix interface supports Matrix addition and multiplication.  The .transform method may be used to return a new matrix generated by applying a unary operator to each element of the marix.


##Optimizer

The Optimizer class has several static methods that may be used to find local minima for the value of an objective function.  The most flexible of these methods is Optimizer.optimizerWithConstraints, which may be used to minimize the value of an arbitrary function with respect to any number of arbitrary constraints.





